
# About

<hero small>AnVIL is a cloud based ecosystem that colocates high value data sets with commonly used bioinformatics tools in a secure environment.</hero>


## AnVIL - an Anaysis, Visualization and Informatics Lab-space

AnVIL is a [NGHRI genomic data resource](https://www.genome.gov/Funded-Programs-Projects/Computational-Genomics-and-Data-Science-Program/Genomic-Analysis-Visualization-Informatics-Lab-space-AnVIL) that leverages a cloud-based infrastructure for democratizing genomic data access, sharing and computing across large genomic, and genomic-related data sets.
 
 In addition to downloading copies of data to local computers and servers, users will have the option to work with data in a secure cloud environment, where they can also use common bioinformatics tools and packages and develop and share their own software tools.

AnVIL is part of the emerging federated genomic data commons ecosystem, which includes other cloud-based data commons established within and outside the NIH.

### Project Goals

The AnVIL project has the following goals:

**Cloud-based data hosting** - Anvil will host large genomic datasets generated by NHGRI programs as well as other initiatives / agencies.

AnVIL will reduce data redundancy and hosting costs by colocating analysis tools with hosting in a secure cloud-based execution environment. This eliminates the need for each user of a dataset to pay for hosting their own copy of the data. 

AnVIL will provide a scalable and interoperable resource for the scientific community.

AvVIL will provide a collaborative analysis environment for both users with limited computaton expertise and data scientist users. 

* AnVIL will enable efficient administration of data access controls and data security.












